Add Sampling SIG research notes (#213)
open-telemetry/oteps: text/experimental/notes/0213-sampler-data-model.md

### Sampling objectives

Collecting trace data is not free. Sampling trace data is a [multi-objective optimization problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-objective_optimization), trading off between objectives which can be mutually incompatible. In no particular order, the goals are:

1. Collect as little data as possible.
   1. Reduce or limit costs stemming from the construction and transmission of spans.
   2. Analytics queries are faster when searching less data.
2. Respect limits of downstream storage systems.

>    1. Trace storage systems often have data ingest limits (e.g., GBs per second, spans per second, spans per calendar month). The costs of exceeding these limits can be either reduced reliability or increased hosting expenditures.

Reviewer: I think similarly "hard" limitations apply for the tracers, collector and the network. Collecting too much data up front can lead to excessive memory usage, CPU or network saturation and can cause not only performance issues, but application malfunction as well.

3. Keep sampling error for statistics of interest within an acceptable range.
   1. "Statistics" can be anything from [RED metrics](https://www.weave.works/blog/the-red-method-key-metrics-for-microservices-architecture/) by service, to data used to answer richer questions like "Which dimensions of trace data are correlated with higher error rate?". You want to ensure that all inferences made from the data you *do* collect are valid.
   2. Setting sampling error targets is akin to setting Service Level Objectives: just as one aspires to build *appropriately reliable* systems, so too one needs statistics which are *just accurate enough* to get valid insights from, but not so accurate that you excessively sacrifice goals #1 and #2.
   3. An example consequence of this goal being unmet: metrics derived from the trace data become spiky and unfit for purpose.

> 4. Ensure traces are complete.

Reviewer: I feel this is a bit too strong. While we want to see many complete traces, we must not require that all traces are complete. Consider infrequently used sub-services which might not get enough representation when all sampling decisions are made at the root. BTW, poor coverage for such services is a weak point across the whole surveyed landscape today.

> 4. Ensure traces are complete.

Reviewer 2: Would something like "Ensure traces are as complete and consistent as possible" better express the intent here?

>    1. "Complete" means that all of the spans belonging to the trace are collected. For more information, see ["Trace completeness"](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.12.0/specification/trace/tracestate-probability-sampling.md#trace-completeness) in the trace spec.

Reviewer 2: Have there been any discussions around how sampling impacts "linked traces" and whether the consistency/completeness goals should support linked traces as well?  Since many async operations are modelled as linked traces, I am trying to understand if there's a way consistent sampling can be achieved across linked traces.

### OpenTelemetry does not balance these goals today

Sampling in OTel may happen in both SDKs or in Collector processes. The offerings available in both fall short of balancing the sampling goals.

<adjusted count: “all the following don’t yet support adjusted count, which is bad>

#### SDKs

Importantly, the `Sampler` interface's ShouldSample routine has to return a `Decision` based solely on information available at span creation-time; it cannot consider anything that is only determined after the work of the span has begun (e.g., span duration). This limited knowledge places a low ceiling on how "clever" any `Sampler` could possibly be in pursuit of balancing the goals.

Partly due to that, the two most relevant [built-in samplers](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/031630c818c60666b27764a5b7a0e4ed435f55c4/specification/trace/sdk.md#built-in-samplers), `TraceIdRatioBased` and `JaegerRemoteSampler`, have limitations.

##### TraceIdRatioBased

> `TraceIdRatioBased` may be used to consistently sample or drop a certain fixed percentage of spans. The decision is based on a random value, the trace ID, rather than any of the span metadata available to ShouldSample (span name, initial attributes, etc.) As a result,

Reviewer 2: Currently, since OpenTelemetry doesn't specify what hashing algorithm to use, my understanding is this statement is not fully accurate (since different language SDKs could have different approaches) - e.g. when it is used for sampling non-root spans. It may be good to clarify that current limitation here.

Shortcomings:

- Like the jaeger-collector-based solutions, this adds new infra outside of the OpenTelemetry Collector.
- Refinery supports receiving OTLP trace data but only exports via the Honeycomb Events API protocol.

### What does this have to do with sampler configurations?

The one thing all these partial solutions have in common is that they all involve *configuration:* a means of specifying the parameters of their behavior. To build a full solution, a sensible place to start is the foundation: a configuration format that can support the use cases that all the aforementioned prior art has identified.

- sampling only within a Collector (or cluster thereof)
- sampling within SDKs, with policies obtained from a file or network socket

See also:

- https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/2085: feature req for remote sampling
- https://github.com/jaegertracing/jaeger/issues/425: Jaeger historical discussion of tail-based sampling.
- [Discuss the possibility of deprecating the tail-based sampling processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/issues/1797)

Notes:

> - TODO(Spencer): Look at https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/pkg/telemetryquerylanguage/tql and give feedback. Split out from transformprocessor.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- TODO(Spencer): Look at https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/pkg/ottl and give feedback. Split out from transformprocessor.
```
